Did
he come in, as far as you know, with any kind of a
blueprint, any kind of goals, a plan of action? No,
I think he did not. He came right out of the College
of Geosciences, where he had been doing a stellar
job, but he hadn't been there but a year, as I
recall. He was here when the Senate, I mean, he
worked well with Frank, and I certainly enjoyed
working with him. And so there was a pretty good
team of like-minded folks who were concerned
about continuing the forward motion of this
institution. Okay, let's please describe the
other key folks. Howard Vestal.
Howard went out about the time Mack did. Okay. And
so Robert Smith. But you worked with Howard for a
while, didn't you? Yes. Oh, that's what I, how was
he to work with? Oh, wonderful. He was a real
easygoing guy. I liked him. I'm sure you did, too.
Oh, you bet. Yeah. John Coldis, Vice President for
Students. I had not... a lot to do with John Coldis.
Typically, when there were cases involving
students, I was sort of, the dean of faculty's
office was the focal point for a student who had a
complaint about for sexual harassment reasons or
whatever. Well, for sexual harassment reasons.
And I never got involved with CODIS on something
like that, really. Did you ever have to deal with
any serious sexual harassment? Yes. Can you
describe the nature of any of them? There were a
couple of cases where it was male-male.
One, the faculty member had another job perking
and
went to that other job and I've talked to him since
and to the best of my knowledge it was one of those
borderline cases and if he transgressed then he
apparently never did again. There was another
case that was really a sticky wicket where a
professor again with males, although he was
married and everything else and had been for
years. But he, it was really a pretty open and shut
case. Did you ever have to deal with a case where a
faculty member went through the whole hearing
process that might lead to termination? Yes, but
it didn't lead to termination, but he lost the
case.
The girl didn't press any further. She had already
left. She was brought back to appear. It was messy.
There were quite a few of them actually, and they
haven't diminished as I understand it from
talking with Bill Perry. It got increasingly
difficult. We had a couple of cases, in fact, after
I had stepped down, retired, I was in a federal
court in Galveston over an age discrimination
case in architecture.
But we won that case. The guy lost his own case by
what he said before a jury. What would you, let's
make believe somebody said, well, what described
the task of the dean of faculties? What is the role
of the dean of faculties? People have asked my wife
that, and she said, well, he runs a complaint
department for the faculty. I'm sort of an, I
think, and you were too, an ombudsman. Also,
I think we served as linkages between groups that
needed to get together sometimes for one reason or
another. I
always felt that I was counsel to faculty who
needed some advice or some way of finding out how to
get advice. This sounds like I'm self-serving,
but one of the most interesting cases I had, and I
never met this person, was a black individual that
had been hired in another part of the university.
He came here with his wife and newly adopted child
and discovered that he could not get insurance for
the adopted child without waiting. It was either
six months or a year. And somebody said, call
Phillips. You're talking about under the
university's insurance program? Yes.
Health insurance. And, you know, it's obviously
common, sound public policy to encourage
adoption. And particularly, you know, in the
black population, the problem is really quite
serious of finding adoptive parents. Well, I
couldn't believe it. I couldn't believe it. I
called Ray Smith. And I heard, well, we've always
done it. What else are you going to hear from him?
But I said, well, this is just intolerable. I said,
this isn't a faculty member. It's not my
jurisdiction, but I'm so mad about it. I'm going to
route a letter through you to Frank. And if you feel
the way I do, I'd appreciate it if you'd sign it.
Otherwise, it's going to him anyway. And I said,
who the hell made this rule? He said, well, it's the
coordinating board. Yeah. I said, what have we got
to do with it, Ray? And he said, well, I don't know,
but they did make that rule. He said, they can have
called meetings. And as a matter of fact, he said, I
think, and he looked at his appointment book,
we're having a meeting next Monday. This is like a
Thursday. He said, we're having a meeting on
Monday. I'll bring it up at that meeting and maybe
they'll take some action. And I said, well, okay,
I'll give you to Monday evening. Otherwise,
you'll see my letter on Tuesday morning for your
signature or not. And he called me Monday
afternoon and said, they changed the rule. And I
called the guy and told him that it's going to be
changed, and I never heard anything more about it.
But can you imagine a silly-ass rule like that? I
never met the man. I don't know who he was. I can't
remember his name. Now, see if you agree with this
description I sometimes used to use. I used to say
to people that at least part of the role of the dean
of faculties was to be a spokesman for the faculty
to the administration. That's exactly right. And
vice versa. And to, in some ways, be one of the
deans, but on other days just be a member of the
academic community. Do you know where the title
came from? Plural, faculties. No, I don't. I
always wondered, and sometime after I was at UTEP,
I happened somehow to see an old Clemson College
catalog. And I looked in there, in the
administration, and there's a man named Jack
Kenny Williams, whose title was Dean of Faculty.
And it was a title that had been, and he was the first
one at Clemson. And that was the And the idea, as I
understood it, was that there was a faculty in
agriculture, a faculty in engineering, a faculty
in arts and sciences, and so that he was the dean to
represent all of those faculties. And that's why
the plural. Because a few other places I've seen
somebody who has the title dean of the faculty.
Yeah, and he may be the chief academic officer.
Right, right. and certainly that would not have
been fitting. There was some association of dean
of, I never joined it, don't know where. Alright,
surely you must have had some, share with the
machine some goofy dean of faculty experiences.
Goofy. Goofy, off the wall, I know you're not going
to believe it type experiences.
Well, I'll have to think about that because I...
Where some faculty member or dean wanted you to do
something that was completely ridiculous or
where you were given a report that was incredible?
Well, I do remember one that was unbelievable and
it occurred in a certain college. An accrediting
committee came on campus
And after a couple of days of talking to everybody,
they had their final meeting and typically I would
meet with them. So I sat down with them and they
began by saying we had a remarkable faculty. And I
said, well, that's awfully good to know. I'll be
pleased to have that. He said, but we're really
reluctant about recommending accreditation.
And I said, why? You just told me we had a good
faculty, and you said we had a good program, blah,
blah, blah. Well, we think your faculty's so good
that you're probably going to lose some of them.
Well, I thought I was listening to, and these were
people that were from second-rate places. That's
what really pissed me off. And I blew my stack. I
said, of course we're going to be rated, just like
we rate good schools for high-class people. If we
don't get rated, there's something wrong with us.
I was just madder than hell. Well, the chief board
rejected their recommendation, but we were
prepared, the dean and I were prepared to go, you
know, ballistic over this. And that was, talk
about goofy, I think that was goofy. You mentioned
Phi Beta Kappa a while ago. Was there a formal
proposal while Vanderbilt was president? Yeah.
There'd been one in my day. Yes.
Somebody torpedoed it as I recall. And one of the
factors that helped to torpedo it is that two of the
visiting team members were spinster ladies from
women's colleges in the mid-Atlantic area, and
they gave me the impression that they had gotten
from somewhere well before they got here, that we
were a good old boy a redneck country bumpkin
school, and we didn't have a chance. Was there a
visit, was there an on-campus visit from, you
know, during the Vandiver days? Well, if there
was, I don't remember, remember meeting with it,
so I guess it never did come to pass, but we did, we
did try, and a chap that headed it up, Frank
personally asked him to do it, was a former head of
the economics department who came from Tulane.
And I can't remember his name, but. Because to me
that's a very appropriate goal. Yes. Because if
Baylor, SMU, TCU, Trinity, Rice, UT, A&M ought to
be competitive. I agree. With that. I agree. Let's
see, so we have Eaton and
Mobley, I mean Eaton and Bill Mews. Who follows
when Mews leaves to go? He was in the Chancellor's
office from the business school, the Deputy
Chancellor. After Vandiver, who is the
president? Mobley? Mobley. Is that still in your
day? Yes, yes. All right. How did you learn that
Vandiver was not going to be president anymore?
I think he told me that he said, I'm going to quit
while I'm ahead. Okay. All right. And then was
there an interim or did Mobley come? Mobley
followed him. Yeah. Describe Mobley's
management leadership style. Well, he was not the
kind that walked the floor of the faculty, of the
factory, as Vannevar was.
he moved and I thought this was a mistake he moved
and took the vice president for finance with him
but not the provost that was symbolically bad and
he moved over to the tower like I as an outsider
thought oh this is isolating the president from
the kind of camp easy accessibility Yeah, I did
too. I thought it was a major mistake. He was a
disappointment to me. I thought that apparently
he had done a pretty good job as a dean, but
apparently
he just Right. Was he the president when you
retired? Yes. Okay. So those ten years, what were
some of the high points for you?
Victories, joys? The book that you have will sort
of emphasize some of the things. Working to to
assisting in the creation of the senate I think
certainly was one the expansion of the
development faculty development program which
and I didn't tell you this but after we got money out
of the former students then we took the case of the
department head dean who is stepping down and
needs also needs to get and we've been using the
development study program for those people but we
went to the development office and said this would
be an appropriate thing for you all to fund so they
came up with a bunch of money for that which I felt
was a good For a while there, our effort to attract
blacks was somewhat effective as long as we were
paying the full salary, not only blacks but
minorities.
I got some pleasure out of that. The revision of the
academic freedom and responsibility tenure
policy, that was a massive effort. involving, I
worked closely with then legal office person
Colleen Batchelor, Bill Batchelor's wife, who
has worked for, what's his name, who was the
attorney, chief attorney? Jimmy Bond. Jimmy
Bond, who's now with the firm that, well, anyway,
with a local firm.
That took, oh, a year or two to get the policy
redone, then the procedures relating thereto. I
remember one of the deans saying, who had been a
vice president at University of Houston, saying,
if only we had had that at Houston, life would have
been a lot simpler. But Vandiver didn't like it. He
thought it was too
detailed. And I didn't like it, too. This is one of
the interesting, in some respects, I didn't. One
of the things that happens, it seems to me, when
you're trying to write problems, trying to make
procedures clear, you end up inadvertently or
inadvertently bureaucratizing things to a
sometimes ridiculous point. So Vandiver had
something of a point there. We were dealing with
all kinds of conceivable possibilities, and we
end up with a document that doesn't leave you much
wiggle room, to use a term that Gordon Eaton used to
use a lot.
But anyway, all in all, I think it did help the
faculty and that's what it was all about. I
mentioned earlier, I found it interesting that so
many people came out of agriculture. It was
agriculture, for example, that first presented
or asked for from the Senate a procedure whereby it
was laid out how to hire a department head, no more
of this business of O.D. Butler deciding who was
going to be. And then it went on for department head
review and department and dean hiring and review.
So we developed a fairly elaborate procedure
there too. Other highlights and victories?
You know, we're making a tally now of the things
that you're saying, yeah, I'm glad we did it. We're
able to get those done.
On a personal level, I really enjoyed the job on the
standpoint of being able to study the various
cultures of the colleges. Fascinating to look at
these different tribes and see what their rituals
are and all of that. and in the process meet an awful
lot of fine folks. A few pickles, but an awful lot of
lovely people. And I found that to be a good
experience. I'm not going to ask the negative now.
In your day, which of the programs do you think were
most nationally competitive? Of the various
colleges or departments? Colleges.
Geosciences has always been a class act.
Per capita, per faculty, they raise money like
there's no tomorrow. I always wanted the College
of Science to sit in it, because every time they'll
hire a chemist, I don't care how much money they
bring in,
the cost of labs and all the rest of it that goes with
it eats you up. I'm told that
Rutter picked two departments to be leading
edges. It might have been better if he'd picked
something other than chemistry. Economists are
high priced, but you only need an economist. You
don't need a bloody lab with them.
Science certainly is strong. If you look at where
the distinguished professors are, they're
concentrated in the College of Science.
I think education has really done rather well for
itself. Liberal arts certainly, I was upset when
liberal arts slipped from second place to third
when business overtook. Business had been number
two, then slipped to three, and then reclaimed
two. But I think
a university, to
be a really good university, has to have an
enormously strong liberal arts college. And so,
that has certainly improved too, I have to say,
enormously.
See, I really come out of liberal arts and
economics. I have a very bizarre history. I would
love to have been in the room when Earl Rudder gave
Mel Greenhut a long lecture about not bringing any
liberal economists here, because I don't think
Mel Greenhut would have needed that lecture. No,
he didn't need the lecture. But he got it anyway
because Rutter didn't know, apparently, that he
was conservative by nature. Any great
frustrations of things that you wish we could have
done during that ten years? I wish we could have
done more with minority hiring, but given the
community, the cards were stacked against us to
some extent, and with student recruitment, too.
Now, there was no, on the campus, there were no
roadblocks, were there? No. No, I think the
community was more of the problem. Vannevar
really tried in that area, there's no question
about that. Coldest wasn't much help, by the way.
I think that... Let's see, and the Honors Program
was really going well during those years under
Dale Noble, wasn't it? Yes. Barry Shapiro got it
started, and Dale Noble did a fine job. Dale's now
the president up at, I believe, Denison? Denison,
uh-huh. One of the things I enjoyed doing was being
sort of a mentor to Larry. God, I tell you, when you
get older, your names fade away. Anyway, he went up
to be a dean in
Arkansas, and now is the vice president in a school
in Oregon and I kind of mentored him. He had been in
charge of the honors program for a couple years and
then he left. But while he was, he didn't have all
that much to do and so he worked with me on the
program like the academic freedom
responsibility and tenure. Can you think of any
opportunities that in hindsight we didn't take?
Well, I can think, see mistakes we made in hiring
deans, and I chaired them. We could have
progressed better if we'd found somebody who
turned out to be more effective, but you know,
There's always a strong tendency for the faculty
to want somebody from off the campus, figuring
they can drive a better bargain and get more
goodies for them. And so you end up buying
sometimes an unknown quantity. Let me add to that.
I've always said too that search committees tend
to over concentrate on the apparent strengths of
the outsider. never thinking about how much the
outsider has to learn about the local situation.
And they then overemphasize the apparent
shortcomings of the local person. Because his
warts are all there to be seen. That's right. Not
realizing that they know all of those
shortcomings and what their limits are. And that
the newcomer, if he or she has no experience in that
region, may spend the first year just settling in.
Whereas I've always thought, and I got this idea
from Earl Rudder, that one of the tasks of every
administrator ought to be to have an adjutant who
might have the capability to move right on in and
keep the ball rolling. Can you think of some
examples of where there was a notable lack of
continuity going from one administrator to the
next?
Well, talking about presidents, I think there was
a lack of continuity certainly between Sampson
and Vandiver, but it didn't make any difference in
that case. All right. And of course... Then from
Vandiver to Mobley? Although Vandiver stayed
around, but I don't think Mobley ever asked his
opinion on anything. I don't think there's been
any continuity since Williams ceased being
president. That's probably true. There was none
between Williams and Jarvis. I've learned in
interviewing Mrs. Williams that Rudder and
Williams were on the phone and did exchange some
letters. And the Rutter plan was Williams was
going to come and in today's lingo be the executive
vice president for the institution. And Rutter
was going to run the system. His title would still
be president.
But Williams, then when Mr. Rutter got sick and
none of this was put into writing. that it all was
lost. So there was some communication between the
two of them, but since then it seems to me there's
been a lot of break. I don't think there was any
problem when Gordon Eaton came in as vice
president, academic vice president. No. That was
a seamless transition.
Of course, I was already there. That helped, I
suppose, a little bit. But he had hit it off well
with Frank from the beginning. You say he did? He
did, yes. Now, I'm not aware of whether there was
any conversation of meaningful nature between
Calhoun and Prescott. I don't think there was, but
I'm not aware. I'm not aware of it either. We both
were there, and I don't guess I There is a tendency
sometimes to
ignore your predecessor. The only time I ever
asked, when I was acting dean, asked John Pearson
something I wanted to know where some money had
gone, and I found out that he had transferred it to
the management department.
and that happened to be the department he went back
to. Let's see, system administration. Did you
ever deal with the system as dean of faculties?
Yes, this is something I had almost forgotten
about, but when Hubert was chancellor, he
instigated a program whereby we exchanged
faculty with preview and I was designated the
person to go down and negotiate that. Jerry Gaston
was then head of sociology and a whole van load of us
went down and the then president whose name I have
forgotten let us cool our heels for an hour.